A convention of the workers of the divine life mission must include all humanity, for no one is outside its pale, and all are plodding along the road to the realisation of the Divinity that is immanent in each. The mission on which every individual has come is to merge the individuality in the Universal. The life that each being is leading is saturated with the Divine. Existence (Sath) is derived from the source of all Existence, Brahman (Supreme Reality) Itself; Consciousness (Chith) is derived from the source of all Consciousness, Brahman Itself. Bliss (Ananda) is derived from the source of all Bliss, Brahman Itself. You are all Sath-Chith-Ananda Swarupa (embodiments of Existence-Consciousness-Bliss), but you are unaware of it and imagine yourself to be this individual or that, subjected to this limitation or that! This is the myth that must be exploded in order that divine life may start.
It is the Divine that inspires, that activates, that leads and fulfills the life of each being, however simple or complex its physical structure may be. From the atom to the Universe, every single entity is moving toward the estuary where it merges in the sea of Bliss. Divine life is the very breath of all beings; it consists of truth, love, and nonviolence (sathya, prema, and ahimsa). For how can any one be false to another when there is no other at all? Falsehood comes out of fear. When there is no second, there is no fear at all. No one is loved more than the Self; so, when all is the self-same Self, all is loved as the Self is loved. As for violence, who is to injure whom, when all are but one?
1Faith In The Almighty Will Remove Anxiety
How to lead a divine life? No special membership entitles you to it. Every struggle to realise the unity behind all the multiplicity is a step on the path of divine life. You have to churn the milk if you wish to separate and identify the butter that is immanent in it. So too, you have to carry on certain processes of thought and action in order to get to the hard core of faith that this world is a funny mixture of real and unreal, that it is in fact false (mithya). Divine life does not admit of the slightest dross in character or delusion in intellect. So, people dedicated to it must emphasise this by precept and example. Wipe out the root causes of anxiety and fear and ignorance. Then only can your true personality shine forth. Anxiety is removed by faith in the Lord; the faith that tells you that whatever happens is for the best and that the Lord’s Will be done. Quiet acceptance is the best armour against anxiety, not the acceptance of the heroic.
Sorrow springs from egoism, the feeling that you do not deserve to be treated so badly, that you are left helpless. When egoism goes, sorrow disappears. Ignorance is just a mistake, mistaken identity of the body as the Self! In fact, you must each one try to become egoless, and then the Lord will accept you as His flute. Once, when a number of people were asked by Me what they would like to be in the hands of God, I got various answers. Some said the lotus, some the conch, some the discus, but no one mentioned the flute. I would advise you to become the flute, for then the Lord will come to you, pick you up, put you to His lips, and breathe through you. Out of the hollowness of your heart due to the utter absence of egoism that you have developed, He will create captivating music for all Creation to enjoy. Be straight, without any will of your own. Merge your will in the Will of God. Inhale only the breath of God. That is divine life, that is what I want you all to achieve.
A mere five-minute inquiry will convince you that you are not the body, the senses, the mind, or the intelligence, the name or the form, but that you are the Atma Itself, the same Atma that appears as all this variety. Once you get a glimpse of this truth, hold on to it; do not allow it to slip. Make it your permanent possession.
